---
layout: book
category: books
title: "Feral"
subtitle: "Rewilding the Land, Sea and Human Life"
author: George Monbiot
year: 2020
image: feral.jpg
---
Necessary.

> The amplification of our lives by technology grants us a power over the natural world which we can no longer afford to use. In everything we do we must now be mindful of the lives of others, cautious, constrained, meticulous. We may no longer live as if there were no tomorrow.

> Over the past few decades, ecologists have discovered the existence of widespread trophic cascades. These are processes caused by animals at the top of the food chain, which tumble all the way to the bottom. Predators and large herbivores can transform the places in which they live. In some cases they have changed not only the ecosystem but also the nature of the soil, the behaviour of rivers, the chemistry of the oceans and even the composition of the atmosphere. These findings suggest that the natural world is composed of even more fascinating and complex systems than we had imagined

> Rewilding, to me, is about resisting the urge to control nature and allowing it to find its own way.

> Sheep farming in this country is a slow-burning ecological disaster, which has done more damage to the living systems of this country than either climate change or industrial pollution. Yet scarcely anyone seems to have noticed.

> One paper estimates that, before their population was reduced, whales recycled at least 12 per cent of the total iron content of the southern ocean’s surface waters.
