---
layout: book
category: books
title: "Nobber"
author: Oisín Fagan
year: 2020
image: nobber.jpg
---
Strong stuff.  I liked the sense of disconnectedness and despair.  Compare with _La Peste_ and also Connie Willis' _Doomsday Book_

> There are so few humans in the world. The earth is an unconquered thing, leafy and overgrown, uncaring. A monotonous thing with no edges that swallows up lonely travellers. It is terrifying to behold. It is terrifying to be so small within it.

> with the perfect confidence of those who fully own what they have created.

> every now and again, eternity ends, and it is not always a good thing.

> You Gaels just love yourselves too much; I cannot stand it. It is fake, I know it. You spend your days discussing your little differences from us, as though they were real, and they are not. You are not magic, you are not mysterious, and you are not different. You have made yourselves up. It’s all lies, and it is so conceited. There is nothing that could not be understood if you spoke openly and plainly.’

> He knows he is nothing to the world, and that to be one person is a meaningless, useless thing, and it is in this that there is strength. Some awareness stretches beyond all this. He can feel it observing everything now, but he does not recognise it; does not know if it loves, hates or is indifferent. All that he knows is that it is beyond him; that it is there.

> A breeze rustles the tree above him; this beauty belongs to no one. He is ready. It begins to rain.
